---
layout: post
title:  "Notes on Chapter 1 of Aidan Wachter’s Six Ways Approaches & Entries for Practical Magic"
date:   2019-06-20 11:45:42 -0500
categories: books animism
---

So, as I mentioned on Instagram, I’ve been meaning to work through some books and I decided to create these “let’s read” (get it?) to motivate myself to engage with these works in a thoughtful way, and maybe generate something useful in the process.

I held an informal poll and _[Six Ways — Approaches & Entries for Practical Magic](http://www.aidanwachter.com/sixways)_ by Aidan Wachter won! So here we are. Also, [this chapter is actually available online on Wachter’s website](http://www.aidanwachter.com/new-blog/six-ways-introduction), so if you want to read along and take a look at the chapter yourself, go for it!

My very loose goal is to crank out a “Read Along” once a week or so, when I have the time to really sit and engage with what I’m looking at. So, let’s jump in.

## Chapter 1: Introduction

- A two-page first chapter is very sensible and I love it.
- Thank you, thank you, thank you for writing “magic” without a “k.” This is purely a personal preference to me, but I have always disliked “magick” — reminds me too much of a lot of the New Age nonsense floating around in the mid-2000s which really turned me off from trying to find magical community for so long.
- I’m going to comment here on a footnote, which remarks that the term “shamanry” is something picked up from Marcus R. McCoy. Folks who know me know that I am extremely skeptical (to the point of hostility) to white people who use the term shamanism and adopt/steal Indigenous practices as their own. (Which reminds me: I do eventually need to write a post about hedgewitchery as I do it — my attempts to do spirit work while being extremely respectful to the spirits, land and people around me who have their own traditions I have no claim to.) “Shamanry” is only mentioned in passing here, so I don’t really know what to think. I’m not familiar with the term, it might be something to look into.
- I love the emphasis on the iterative process, as I am the same way. Every thing is trial and error. Emphasis on “try it and error.”
- Magic is not a religious practice for me either. I do sometimes wonder if people might look at my practice from the outside and disagree.
- Quoted because I love it: “Magic and sorcery are ways of being in the world. (…) It is an art of total responsibility, careful attention, and reciprocity. ” YES. YES. YES. **_FUCK YES._**
- The chapter does emphasize that a lot of this book is based on the author’s own internal logic, which may not resonate with other people’s own internal logic. This is something that really resonates. I have had people ask me for help designing spells, and I am usually at a bit of a loss, because I basically only know how to do magic in (and out of) my own body. I’m not really sure how to create magic for others.
- Another good quote: “These magical techniques and ideas will only be useful in actual practice.” I like this, because all my daily magical practices are essentially rooted in action (essentially: breathing, speaking, singing, walking).
- He wraps up his introduction about how this book offers a window into the internal logic behind what he does, and maybe that window will be useful for other magicians.